---
title: A Post-structuralist Anarchist Conception of Normative Monogamy
subtitle: Academic Essay
date: 2026-05
author: Tauri
tags: 
---

## **A Post-structuralist Anarchist Conception of Normative Monogamy** 

Capstone 

May 14, 2026 

# **Table of Content** 


|Marriage, State, Individual|7|
|---|---|
|The Rationale of Monogamous Marriage|8|
|The State benefiting from ‘Monogamous’ Marriage|9|
|The State Motivating and Enforcing ‘Monogamous’ Marriage|11|
|Gender and Sexuality Under Normative Monogamous Marriage|14|
|Anarchist Conceptualizations of Human Nature, Authority and Marriage|17|
|Anarchist Arguments Against the State|18|
|Social Anarchism and Individualist Anarchism|20|
|Classical Anarchist Conceptualization of Family|23|
|Post-structuralist Anarchism|27|
|Poststructuralism’s Main Claims|27|
|Postanarchism’s Main Claims|30|
|Postanarchist Critique of Normative Monogamy|32|
|Conclusion|38|
|References|42|



## **Abstract** 

This paper develops a post-structuralist anarchist critique of normative monogamy, or mononormativity. It argues that monogamy should not be understood as a natural, pre-political, or a private romantic choice, for it should rather be seen as a political phenomena supported by law, culture, gender roles, and internalized desire. The essay first examines the benefits that states receive from monogamous marriage. It then illustrates the classical anarchist critique of marriage as an institution backed by the state, religion, patriarchy, and property. Classical anarchists leave monogamy undertheorized as a broader social norm. Finally, the essay uses postanarchist theory, with its poststructuralist critique of fixed identity, representation, and dispersed power, to argue that mononormativity operates beyond formal institutions. The essay concludes that anarchist resistance should not aim at abolishing monogamy, but should rather multiply possible forms of intimacy based on consent, autonomy, mutuality, and non-domination. 

_Keywords:_ anarchism, postanarchism, marriage, normative monogamy 


## **A Post-structuralist Anarchist Conception of Normative Monogamy** 

## **Introduction** 

This is a philosophical essay and as such it abides to the philosophical culture of not heavily relying on detailed empirical data, or any empirical method dealing with crystalized case studies of institutions, states, or people. Nevertheless, some examples are used from various countries, policies and institutions but they  are used for a broader illustration of theoretical arguments. 

This essay concerns itself with the postanarchist understanding of normative monogamy. More specifically, this project attempts to expand the postanarchist critique of authority and classical anarchism. Postanarchism can particularly move beyond marriage and families as a formal state institution and move towards understanding monogamy as a broader social norm. The central thesis of this essay is that monogamy should not be understood as a pre-political, natural structure embedded within human nature, or as a private romantic choice, but rather as a political structure that is supported by the state, reinforced through culture, connected to gender and sexuality, and internalized through desire. Here, monogamy itself is not questioned as being oppressive or liberatory, but it is argued that monogamy may become oppressive if it becomes the norm. Normative monogamy (mononormativity) has the ability to set up a system that may disadvantage other forms of sexuality and treat exclusive couplehood as the most legitimate, mature, and socially valuable form of intimacy. 

The fundamental aspect of normative monogamy is not necessarily the couplehood, but rather the exclusivity that at least one party enjoys. There is not one singular form of monogamy, because different cultures and societies perceive it differently. For example, some cultures prohibit the married (or taken) individual to make friends with the opposite gender while some allow it. In the most rare examples, polygynous norms may form such as in Islamic societies, where the man, and only the man, can marry up to four women. Yet this still follows mononormative elements of exclusivity. 

The essay begins with exploring and explaining the relation between marriage, the state, and the individual. This section first defines monogamy and illustrates the idea that marriage is typically built around the expectation of exclusivity between two people. It also discusses the main rationales used to defend monogamous marriage, including arguments about nature, child-rearing, sexual control, paternal certainty, and social stability. Monogamous marriage helps the state in the organization of inheritance, parentage, taxation, citizenship, immigration, and social reproduction. Marriage is seen here as a legal and administrative structure that makes intimate life easier for the state to recognize and manage. As states benefit from monogamous relationships, they reinforce it by measures such as financial benefits, legal privileges, residence rights, testimonial privilege, and cultural recognition. Yet, monogamous marriage is not only a legal phenomenon, for it can shape the sexuality and culture of people. Monogamy has historically been connected to patriarchal structures, the regulation of women’s sexuality, and unequal gender expectations. In this section, it is argued that normative monogamy shapes sexual subjectivity by producing shame, possessiveness, jealousy, and internalized expectations of exclusivity. In essence, marriage and normative monogamy are primarily political tools used to achieve certain goals. 

The second part introduces anarchist theory and its conception of monogamous marriage and the family. Firstly, this section introduces different understandings of anarchism, the main two approaches being social anarchism and individual anarchism (anarcho-individualism). It also discusses their fundamental ideas on human nature and their opposition to the state. Social anarchists, being the mainstream anarchists, as well as feminist anarchists (anarcha-feminists) criticized marriage especially because of its connection to the state, the Church, patriarchy, property, and women’s subordination. However, as I will argue, classical anarchists usually criticized marriage as an institution rather than monogamy as a norm. This creates the gap that the final section of the essay addresses. 

The third part introduces post-structuralist anarchism, also known as postanarchism. Here I explain poststructuralism as a separate philosophical movement that questioned fixed identities, ‘universal truths’ such as a stable human nature, natural gender roles, objective moral foundations, fixed meanings of sexuality and identity, and overall essentialist ideas of human nature. Then, I show how postanarchism used poststructuralist ideas to revise and expand classical anarchist thought and to conceptualize social power as dispersed through language, institutions, identities, sexuality, and daily practices.  This methodological shift is necessary since monogamy is not only a formal institution, but also a norm that produces subjects and desires. The essay concludes by developing a potential postanarchist critique of normative monogamy. I argue that postanarchism explains both the structure that mononormativity produces, in which some relations between subjects are seen as illegitimate, and the subject’s desire for mononormativity. Finally, I argue that postanarchist resistance does not move towards abolishing monogamy or replacing it with nonmonogamy as a new universal model. Rather, postanarchism allows multiplying forms of intimacy and opening space for relationships based on consent, mutuality, autonomy, and non-domination. The essay concludes that postanarchism is epistemically useful because it extends the anarchist critique of authority into the intimate sphere, showcasing the mere idea of love and sex as fields of power. 



## **Marriage, State, Individual** 

Modern states significantly benefit from monogamous families. Legally recognized marriage produces stable household units that simplify taxation, inheritance, and welfare provision. Monogamy also reduces conflict over partners and supports social stability. At a deeper level, the family functions as a site of social reproduction, raising children and transmitting norms to the next generation. For these reasons, monogamy has often been promoted or institutionalized by states as a ‘natural union’ and as means of stabilizing social order and organizing the reproduction of the population. 

Modern marriage as an institution more often than not is monogamous. It is widely believed that only two parties may marry. Marriage in most cases binds a woman and a man and involves exclusivity. The exclusivity typically includes sexual and emotional aspects. And one’s loyal commitment is necessary for the continuity of the marriage. Even though monogamy is almost universally accepted, states impose different monogamy rules: some states do not tolerate extramarital sex while some do, some states believe that a person can remarry in the case of death or divorce of one’s partner (serial monogamy), some states do not tolerate premarital sex while some do (Beckerman & Valentine, 2002; Hennigh, 1970; Kramer & Russell, 2014; Schacht, 2013) All these forms of monogamy share an understanding of exclusivity between two parties in slightly different forms. The belief that only two parties can marry each other is so deeply held that even after the legalization of homosexual marriage, this law still continues to exist. This phenomenon, where the monogamous relation becomes the norm, is called normative monogamy, also known as mononormativity. 



## **The Rationale of Monogamous Marriage** 

Monogamy’s normalization is implemented with certain rationales and arguments. Arguments in favor of monogamy can be centered around the need for sexual restriction, the upbringing of children, controlling the marriage market, or monogamy as a natural instinct of human beings. 

One of the reasons for favoring monogamy is the belief that it is a pre-political, natural phenomenon which the state has to accept (Girgis et al, 2010). Unlike institutions like public schools, hospitals and even entire governments, which are human made and can be modified according to the needs and preferences of people, marriage forms cannot and need not change, because they are natural. The belief that monogamous marriage is natural leads to other convictions such as that the state needs to support monogamous marriage and forbid non-monogamy. 

Beyond philosophical arguments, some scholars such as Joseph Henrich et al (2012) claim that monogamy reduces competition among men for wives and decreases the number of unmarried, low-status men in society. And lowering the pool of unmarried men has important social consequences. When large numbers of men are excluded from marriage markets, competition for partners intensifies and can lead to higher rates of crime, violence, and social instability. Monogamous marriage distributes partners more evenly across the male population and therefore suppresses intense intrasexual competition. As a result, societies with normative monogamy tend to experience lower levels of crime  (Joseph Henrich et al, 2012) 

The third reason for favoring monogamous families is that it facilitates sexual control over the partner. Family laws in many countries help enforce loyalty, fidelity etc. and thus help control partners.  And this control is believed to be needed for the well-being of partners. A monogamous union can limit the partner’s sexual freedom in order to reduce the risks that can be posed by outside sexual attachments. Supporters of this argument believe that non-monogamous relations can produce rivalry, jealousy, and instability. The preservation of the emotional security of the relationship is essential for the partners. This is why supporters of this argument believe that the state is obligated to promote/support formal monogamous relationships (Brake, 2026). 

A fourth rationale claims that the monogamous family helps with upbringing children, where two-parent relationships are assumed to have a positive effect on children’s well-being and upbringing. Supporters of this argument claim that a two-parent system ensures parental obligation, paternal certainty and the long-term care of children in addition to labor sharing. They also argue that the correlation between single motherhood and poverty raises a concern as twoparent households tend to raise healthier children with better socio-economic status. On the emotional side, some argue that children live happier lives as they benefit from both parents who represent a masculine and a feminine figure (Brake, 2012). 

## **The State benefiting from ‘Monogamous’ Marriage** 

Modern states are taken to be responsible for maintaining social order, regulating population dynamics, and ensuring the continuity of legal and economic systems. These duties more often than not include duties of supporting and/or creating cultural, social, political and economic conditions for optimal reproduction, child-creating, inheritance, and the transmission of property across multiple generations to come. Since families play a certain role in these processes, the state is obligated to regulate familial relations  to stabilize the broader structure of the society. Through family laws the states can influence people's family lives and sexuality, for the ultimate goal of ensuring the preassumed stability it provides (Friedman, 2005). The pair-bonding system has an impact on the effectiveness of governance. As Nancy Cott (2000) argues, modern states have long treated marriage as a foundational institution for ensuring social order, linking family formation to legal identity, inheritance rules, and civic status. Through the regulation of marriage, the state can structure gender roles, determine legitimate offspring, and stabilize the transmission of property and social status across generations. 

As an institution marriage plays a direct role in reproducing and composing the population and therefore help shape the political community itself. This conversion of intimate life into a political matter stems from the importance of reproduction and the socialization of citizens under the governance of the state. As the continuation of a political community depends on the birth and upbringing of new members, whether they confess it or not, the states see family structures and intimate relationships as areas that require regulation (Fineman, 2004). The states influence the upbringing of children, the organization of the responsibilities between partners, and the integration of people into society. According to some scholars, at least part of the reason for governments to preserve a specific marital ideal and used marriage law to organize gender relations and social status (Cott, 2000). 

Historically speaking, marriage has ties with clarifying parentage and inheritance. In monogamous martial systems, the legal presumption of the father ‘owning’ his wife’s children for certainty allows clear lines of descent and property ownership. This simplifies transfer of wealth across generations. Thus, the institution of marriage allowed societies to organize inheritance more efficiently and avoid disputes over succession (Coontz, 2005; Henrich, Boyd, & Richerson, 2012). 

Other similar arguments claim that the state benefits from monogamous relationships because legal institutions concentrate authority and dependency inside small domestic units and this facilitates the functioning of modern states (Card, 1996). To sum up, the state benefits from monogamy because it privatizes social reproduction, child-rearing, emotional care, and domestic labor, contributes to socialization of the new generation etc. and thus frees larger collective social institutions from these duties and reduces the need for broader public systems to address these needs. 

## **The State Motivating and Enforcing ‘Monogamous’ Marriage** 

As modern states benefit from a monogamous family  they maintain and enforce it. The state not only bans marriage between more than two parties, but also supports two-party sexual, exclusive relationships via multiple means. For example, in many countries married couples get various financial benefits. Both extremely liberal states like Germany and more authoritarian states like Russia, provide special benefits to married couples. Not only does Germany only recognize a monogamous partnership, but also makes the economic life of the monogamous married couples easier by measures, such as income-splitting for married households, decreasing total tax burden for each couple, providing parental allowances etc.  These measures help support the household organized around the legally recognized couple (Federal Ministry of Finance, 2024). Similarly, Russia has a state-supported payment system where some families can use for children’s education and other needs (Social Fund of Russia, n.d.). Therefore, financially speaking, marriage, with its monogamous formal form, stands at a higher advantage compared to other formally unrecognized models of partnership. 

Benefits are not limited to financial support or advantages as states provide non-financial support to monogamous couples. In many legal systems, marriage grants access to rights that are otherwise difficult to obtain through private agreements. Majorly, residence rights are granted through spousal immigration policies. In many countries, marriage to a citizen or permanent resident provides a legal pathway to obtain residence permits, family reunification or simply longterm visas (Metz, 2007). Here, immigration law assumes the spouse as immediate family members thus allowing them to bypass certain restrictions. This links intimate relationships directly to the distribution of state controlled migration rights (Brake 2012). In addition to this, the law provides spouses with protections through marital privilege, including both spousal testimonial privilege and marital communications privilege, which protect confidential communication between spouses and may prevent one spouse from being compelled to testify against the other (Cornell Law School, n.d.). Other minor privileges include hospital and prison visitation rights, and decision-making rights in medical or legal situations, all which depends on the state’s approval of the partnership. 

Normative monogamy can also be both motivated by and further reinforced through cultural forces. Marriage could be seen as an institution that carries meanings of legitimacy, adulthood, and moral respectability. Monogamous marriage continues to function as a powerful symbolic marker of prestige and achievement even in societies where many of its practical functions have weakened. Marriage often signals stability, commitment, and social maturity, which reinforces its cultural importance and helps maintain its privileged position among different forms of relationships (Cherlin, 2004). 

Cultural forces can also embrace normative monogamy through a negation of nonmonogamous activities. For instance, it is considered an insult to call someone a ‘cuckold’, a term which refers to people (usually men) who either do not mind, or like to watch their partner have sexual intercourses with other people. Historically, the figure of the ‘cuckold’ or simply the term ‘cuck’ has been tied to concerns about masculine honor and control over sexual fidelity, which reflects broader social expectations that intimate relationships should be exclusive. The word ‘cuck’ in a sense signals that the man’s ownership over the woman’s sexuality is distorted due her having other sexual relations. Such language helps construct monogamy as the respectable and socially legitimate form of intimacy, while non-monogamous arrangements are treated as deviant. Other forms of family unions can also follow the same patterns as normative monogamy. It might be argued that Saudi Arabia’s polygynous society can be set as a counter-example that states always view monogamous relationships as a natural and legal form of relationship. However, this case does not challenge the argument that states benefit from sexual control through exclusivity, since Saudi polygyny still preserves the same state-centered and patriarchal logic of regulated intimacy. For Saudi Arabia and a few other Islamic countries, polygyny is legally permitted for men, who may marry up to four wives, while women are not permitted to marry multiple husbands (Al Qurtuby, 2022; Amnesty International, 2023). Therefore, the state still reinforces the logic of control for one party; it also  continues to organize marriage, divorce, guardianship, and custody through unequal gender roles. This stands as an exception to almost global monogamy. Moreover, In Islamic culture the term ‘dayyouth’ follows a similar structure as the term ‘cuck’, it refers to men who allow female relatives or a spouse to display unchast behavior (e.g., having a boyfriend, having multiple sex partners, not wearing hijab) (Hamamra, 2018). Therefore, even in polygynous cultures certain forms of exclusivity and sexual control are still visible. 

The media can reinforce and support normative monogamy. Movies for instance, especially movies circulating around the theme of romance, promote monogamous sexual relations. Romance movies often stress on the over-all happiness and well-being that the characters have while being romantically and sexually involved with one person. This eventually leads to the amplification of the belief in normative monogamy (Hefner & Wilson, 2013; Johnson & Holmes, 2009). 

## **Gender and Sexuality Under Normative Monogamous Marriage** 

Normative monogamy is linked to certain gender roles and especially male dominance and female subordination. Many scholars claim that historically the emergence of monogamy was correlated with the emergence of private property. With the emergence of private property and monogamous marriage, Lerner (1986) argues women were subordinated and men acquired the ability to regulate women’s sexual and reproductive capacities. This, according to Lerner, became central to the development of patriarchal social structures and the inheritance of property. In this view, monogamous marriage transcended the mere boundaries of personal love and became a part of a broader system through which male authority over women’s bodies and labor was institutionalized. Similarly, Pateman (1988) argues that modern social and political institutions are built upon what she calls a “sexual contract,” in which marriage continues to incorporate women into society as subordinate partners rather than fully equal individuals. Taken together, these perspectives suggest that normative monogamy has historically been intertwined with patriarchal structures that regulate women’s sexuality and reinforce gender hierarchy. 

As just noted, monogamous marriage came along with certain gender roles: men being the leading figure of the unit while women took care of the house and the offspring. This is coupled with certain sexual behaviors situating men as the dominant partner which has control over the submissive woman’s body. In this relation only men have full agency while women are treated as objects. In a narrowed down example, a sexual act is seen as ‘complete’ if the male party reaches orgasm, while women’s orgasm is often ignored or is seen as a non-essential ‘nice’ side effect (Miller, 2022) . As a result, the whole definition of ‘real’ sex revolves around men’s arousal which limits the significance of women’s sexuality. 



The sexual agency of women and men are also faced with certain double standards that can be expressed in different ways. For instance, the extramarital affairs of women are treated much more severely, both privately and publicly, than if a man does the same (Rothschild, 2018). Male infidelity is usually seen as a natural or more socially tolerable phenomenon while female chastity is a central moral expectation (Lerner, 1986). Patriarchal systems historically enforced strong norms of sexual purity for women because women’s reproductive capacity was directly tied to lineage and social order. As a result, women’s sexual conduct became a matter of social regulation, while men’s sexuality was often understood as more autonomous and less subject to strict moral discipline (Lerner, 1986). In addition, single women are still faced with more social stigma for engaging in multiple sexual relations or expressing sexual desire openly, all while men may receive more social acceptance for similar behavior (Crawford & Popp, 2003). 

Non-monogamous tendencies within individuals are usually suppressed through various ways. This suppression can include moral stigma and cultural expectations that frame exclusivity as the only legitimate form of intimate life. Individuals who engage in or express interest in nonmonogamous relationships are frequently perceived as less trustworthy, less committed, or morally suspect compared to monogamous couples (Conley et al., 2013). As a result, people may internalize these norms and regulate their own desires or behaviors in order to conform to socially accepted relationship structures. Societies with strong monogamous culture, with significant legal, social economic etc. support for monogamous marriage shapes sexual subjectivity by encouraging individuals to internalize exclusivity as the only proper form of desire. People in such societies often absorb monogamous stigma and turn it inward that leads to experiencing shame or doubt about desires and relationship preferences that do not fit monogamous norms (Moors et al., 2021). 



This process of internalization might happen through some psychological process described by Freudian psychoanalysis.  According to this highly influential theory civilizations pressure individuals to regulate their sexual life. The external prohibition of non-monogamy, either directly and formally through law or indirectly by other means, can translate to internal psychic authority. Individuals absorb the external rules into the structure of the self; such as guilt and selfsurveillance. Monogamous normativity in this scenario is not merely a social or political phenomenon but an internal stigmatization (Freud, 1908/1959, 1930/1961; Westerink, 2021). 

## **Anarchist Conceptualizations of Human Nature, Authority and Marriage** 

Anarchism is an umbrella term covering a vast range of ideas which usually address emancipation from hierarchical constraints, the main constraint being the state. Anarchists reach their conclusion about the need for emancipation through their prior commitment to some fundamental values like liberty and equality (Simmons, 2010, p. 3). To put it in a nutshell, many anarchists reach the belief in the illegitimacy of the state’s authority because they are committed either to freedom or equality or both. If individuals are to be genuinely free, anarchists think, then no political body should require them to act against their wishes and beliefs. And if individuals are equal then no group of people should have more say on political matters than others. Anarchists oppose the state, and other institutions that impose hierarchies (i.e. the Church). 

Anarchism historically came into being as a resistance towards oppression and injustice, and it took a concrete theoretical form in post-feudal societies, in which anarchists drew ideas from the Renaissance’s stress on individual expression, and the Enlightenment’s perception on social progress (Marshall, p. 4). For instance, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, as one of the earliest anarchists, took great inspiration from the Enlightenment. He embraced a particular vision of social progress and believed that a revolution that can bring about anarchism is not only morally permissible but is morally commendable (Hopper, 1978). 

The main classification differentiates individualist anarchism from social anarchism.  The difference between these two is whether the collective holds greater value than the individual on economical, political, and sociological aspects. Below I will briefly discuss social and individualist versions of anarchism and turn to the relatively new distinction between classical and poststructuralist anarchisms and their viewpoint on monogamous marriage. 

## **Anarchist Arguments Against the State** 

Anarchists generally see the state as a centralized institution of domination that claims the right to govern, rule, and subject a population to their authority and simultaneously claim the right to punish disobedience. Anarchists do not see the state as a neutral institution that creates order, but also as a hierarchy that situates decision-making mechanisms above ordinary people through the monopoly of violence, where the only legitimate agent to perform violence is the state (Carter, 1971; McLaughlin, 2007). Anarchists are not necessarily criticizing states with corrupted leaders or dictatorships, but also the state form itself, that even a democratic or liberal state still illegitimately commands people from above. Anarchists also question the idea of political obligation, believing that the state cannot form a legitimate moral duty for citizens. As a result, anarchists remain critical of other theories that attempt to justify the authority of the state. 

Anarchists criticize the monopoly that the state holds over certain matters. The state claims that it is the only institution that is liable enough to bind and enforce policies over people through certain methods; the methods being courts, police units, prison, and military armies. From an anarchist viewpoint, this creates inequality and a division between the ruler and the ruled. In addition, anarchists argue that even the claims of security and order that the state makes are dependent on coercion if the rules are backed by certain threats of punishment (Carter, 1971). Anarchists argue that people do not necessarily consent to the state’s claim of authority. The state assumes obligation from the people within its territory, but anarchists believe that this assumption is not a moral right. Anarchists argue that citizens do not owe the state a moral duty, for they did not personally choose the territory, the legal system, and the overall policies that they are born under (Simmons, 2001; Wolff, 1970). Thus, they believe that the method in which the state translates the person’s location of birth into a supposed moral duty of obedience is not theoretically sufficient to justify obedience. In this view, anarchists argue that people can manage social order through voluntary association, shared responsibility, and an overall decentralized direct form of self-organization (Kinna, 2019; Marshall, 2010). 

Anarchists argue against theories that attempt to justify political authority, such as the social contract theory and the democratic/representative theories of authority. Anarchists criticize the social contract theory, which claims that people give up certain aspects of freedom to submit to the state’s authority in exchange for security, protection, and maintenance of social order (Christiano and Sciaraffa, 2025). The anarchist response is that the supposed consent is mostly fictional since people are simply born in a territory that they did not choose and therefore the contract is not based on the individual’s conscious decision (Simmons, 2001; Wolff, 1970). Anarchists also argue that state authority cannot be legitimate even if it is democratic or representative. Elections do not necessarily legitimize power since the representatives gain explicit access over making decisions over others and enforce those laws through coercive institutions. Anarchists believe that the people cannot have one singular will, that the interests and desires vary from one another, therefore the representatives cannot simplify the plurality of the citizens to a single political manner (Franks, 2020; Gordon, 2008). 

## **Social Anarchism and Individualist Anarchism** 

All anarchists believe that all states are illegitimate, yet they claim this on different bases. Social anarchism (also known as collectivist anarchism), and individualist anarchism (also known as anarcho-individualism) are the main umbrella terms that capture and identify anarchist schools of thought (Heywood, 2021). Social anarchists see social solidarity and individual liberty as mutually compatible. Social anarchists stress on voluntary social collaboration through mutual aid. They tend to imagine non-hierarchical forms of social organization, such as networks of popular assemblies and worker cooperatives. In contrast, individual anarchists generally prioritize the individual over external forces such as groups, society, traditions, and ideological systems. Social anarchists are typically considered the mainstream anarchists (Marshall, 2009, p. 4), and the early twentieth-century anarchist traditions, which were mostly following the social path, are usually referred to as classical anarchism (Levy, 2010). Overall, the disagreement between the two types could be “the degree to which an individual ought to be subordinated to the community,” (Fiala, 2025). 

Firstly, social anarchists believe that humans naturally both want and need social solidarity (Haywood, 2021). Solidarity is the basic human need, with freedom and other values coming after it. Major social anarchist thinkers including Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Mikhail Bakunin, and Peter Kropotkin believe that the overcoming of the human, by the human, is what proves the natural superiority of humans over animals over consciousness, rationality and solidarity. By overcoming ‘the human, by the human’, Kropotkin means the ascent from ‘instincts’ such as competition or hatred in order to live peacefully among other humans. Thus, for social anarchists, the ability to rebel against the self is what makes one a genuine individual (Marshall, 2008, p. 290). The individual perfects itself by rebelling against the internal and the external powers and merging with others. Social anarchists did not simply reject selfish individuality, but saw human beings’ self-discovery only through relation with others, through dissolution of the selfish individuality. Social anarchists believe that humans only reach their full potential within a society. 

Social anarchists argue in favor of a stateless society from this vantage point on human nature. While believing in the adjustability of human nature and the influence of the environment, social anarchists believe that solidarity and mutual interdependence is a fundamental law. They distinguish natural laws from artificial laws. Genuine liberty is possible in an environment where there are no artificial laws and one lives in accordance with natural laws (Marshall, 2009, p. 293). In regards to the state, Mikhail Bakunin claims that since it is constituted by artificial law, it restricts the full potential of the individual. The growth that the state speaks of is fundamentally deviant from nature (Kulcsár, 2023). 



Social anarchists had a major tendency on relying on the social and/or cooperative human nature to justify disobedience towards the state. Of course individuals aim at survival, but it is possible only through cooperation which happens the best if there is genuine solidarity. And that genuine solidarity is impossible under states. In this way, social anarchism rests on a naturalistic claim that mutual support is deeply embedded not only in animal but also human life and has historically played a progressive role in development (Reis, 2024).  This way social anarchists like Kropotkin rely on ideas of evolutionary theory to justify the need of solidarity and ultimately the right to revolt against the government. 

Individualist anarchists tend to dismiss, or simply ignore the fact of solidarity in the sense that social anarchists imagine; instead, they put the individual at the core of their argument. They believe that the individual’s will should always be given priority over external wills that are imposed on them. Any constraint on individual desire is viewed as evil. And if on an individual's will its free expression is the ultimate good, then any compulsory, coercive, and non-consensual will, including that of the state, would be the absolute evil (Heywood, p. 117). Individualist anarchism conceives society as a collection of separate and sovereign individuals who resist and fear absorption into the community (Marshall, 2008). In this view, human beings can coordinate social life through voluntary contract, personal judgment, and rational self-interest rather than through deep communal bonds. 

Individualist anarchists fear the tyranny of the common. They are particularly suspicious of collective identity, believing that it could lead to obligatory cooperation and not one based on the individual’s own will, a will which they see as rational. The boldest type of individualist anarchism that directly addresses the tension between the primacy of the individual and the community is Max Stirner’s ego-anarchism. In contrast to the social anarchist notion of equality, he rejects the idea of classless society or humanity as a whole, claiming that human nature, or values such as justice, God and so on are merely abstract concepts (Guerin, 1970). In the anarchoegoist concern, the state is rejected for it is a structure that converts living persons into instruments of a collective end; and at the same time, in a stateless society that emphasizes values around community (communalism), the individual could face the same struggles. 

It should be noted that social anarchism does not fully dismiss the individual, and neither does individual anarchism dismiss the collective. Social anarchism merely prioritizes the stateless collective as a site that can develop the full potential of individuals, and that individuals would naturally desire solidarity and a collective based on their own freedom. At the same time, individual anarchists believe that if some individuals voluntarily, based on their own will, belong to a community, it does not necessarily harm them as long as the collective does not limit his/her sovereignty. 

## **Classical Anarchist Conceptualization of Family** 

The preceding discussion on family and anarchism will help understanding anarchist views on family.  Anarchists are often suspicious of family units. They did not necessarily provide a critique of monogamy, but they discussed the patriarchal structure of marriage, and its connection to the state’s dominant nature. Social anarchists often attack what they would call the authoritarian family; they argue that women and men should have the liberty to marry or divorce as they please without interference from external parties such as the state or the church. They also believe that inheritance should be abolished so that all of the community can enjoy free and fair liberty. Anarcha-feminists (also known as feminist anarchists or anarcho-feminists) such as Emma Goldman extend the social anarchist argument. They believe that marriage is a form of women’s subjection and link liberation to sexual autonomy and consent (Jeppesen & Nazar, 2012). Some anarchists such as Proudhon, however, defend the hierarchy of the family structure (Prichard, 2022). In short, anarchism contains both anti-marriage and marriage-revisionist tendencies. Most anarchist currents reject the family when it means coercive marriage, fixed gender hierarchy, or state-regulated intimacy. 

Firstly, social anarchists believe that civil or religious marriage has to be based on equality and mutual respect. According to Bakunin (1971), adult partners may unite and separate voluntarily without coercion from religious or civil institutions. For him, this is the concept of free marriage, where hierarchical authority and domination as a whole has to be abolished even in social institutions. Bakunin particularly grounded his ideal version of marriage in moral sincerity, where there should be no double standards regarding the obligations of the woman and the man. Kropotkin shared some similarities with Bakunin. He also rejected the formality of the union between men and women and believed that marriage should be focused on mutual development and equality (Kinna, 2016). At the same time, Kropotkin was critical of superficial appeals to sexual liberation that replaced traditional marriage with unstructured ‘free love’; for him, informal sexual freedom could reproduce forms of male irresponsibility and female vulnerability if not grounded in relations of equality (Kinna, 2016). Thus, classical social anarchists did not necessarily reject marriage as a whole, but questioned its position within the state and the situation that women face in marriage. 

Most anarcha-feminists radicalized the views of social anarchists; they believe that marriage inherently oppresses women due to its lack of consent. Emma Goldman (1914), as the main figure of both classical social anarchism and anarcha-feminism, distinguished marriage from genuine love. As authors mentioned above, she argued that the institution of marriage historically emerged from property relations and economic dependence rather than from free human attachment. She believes that marriage transforms women into economically dependent partners whose social role is structured around duty, reproduction, and obedience rather than mutual affection and autonomy. As for the alternative, she embraced the concept of free love, where the consensual sexual relations between people should be separated from the state and religious institutions (Jeppesen & Nazar, 2012). For her, this would allow women to position their sexuality in their own autonomy and agency. 

Some anarchists rejected free love, or actually embraced the hierarchy within marriage and the family. Proudhon specifically saw the patriarchal family as a necessary moral and social unit, so he defended a hierarchical conception of sexual difference within it. He regarded marriage as a stabilizing institution and even framed the conjugal couple as an “organ of justice” (Prichard, 2022; Thomas, 2002). Some anarcha-feminists also were suspicious of free love but not in the same patriarchal sense of Proudhon. Lucy Parsons for instance argued that marriage is not inherently illegitimate. She agreed with the anarcha-feminist critique of marriage as a site of domination and oppression for women, but also believed that it should not be outright rejected since it can be reformed to include egalitarian values. She was convinced that marriage could become harmonious if wives were treated as companions and equals rather than subordinates (Parsons, 1905). Her argument against free love was coupled with worries that it would increase pregnancy risks and sexually transmitted diseases (Kowal, 2018). In conclusion, classical anarchists do not unanimously reject marriage and do not always share the same views on marriage. 

Overall, classical anarchists did not base their critique of marriage on arguments against monogamy, for they rather criticized the inequalities within typical monogamous marriages of their time. Classical social anarchists also argued that no external power, whether civil or religious, has the authority to verify, control, or restrict the bond between two consenting adults. Anarchafeminists further extended this view and argued for women’s rights within marriage, such as the abolition of patriarchal society and gender roles that oppress women. These arguments do not challenge monogamy but the institution of marriage as a whole. 

## **Post-structuralist Anarchism** 

The political climate Bakunin, Kropotkin, Goldman and other classical anarchists criticized are different from the current political climate. Post-structuralist anarchism (postanarchism) is a contemporary theoretical development of anarchism that adapts the claim that power is not centralized in the hands of a state or a few political players and instead it is diffused in the society. Post-anarchists such as Saul Newman and Todd May argue that power does not belong to a centralized state but rather to is distributed among individuals through language, sexuality, small informal or formal institutions like family and hospitals. This is why they focus on the micropolitical aspect of resistance. They also question the utopian aspect of anarchism, where a stateless classless society can exist. Lastly, postanarchists reject the concept of human nature outside society, believing that power is the main force that shapes human nature and identity (May, 1994; Newman, 2001).  These postanarchist claims gain support from poststructuralism, thus below some relevant theses of poststructuralism will be discussed. 

## **Poststructuralism’s Main Claims** 

An understanding of postanarchism cannot be done without the initial grasp of poststructuralism (Newman, 2007, p. 4). Poststructuralist philosophers such as Gilles Deleuze, Michel Foucault and Jaqcues Derrida extended and radicalized the structuralist idea that reality is structured largely through language; and that we need to study the underlying structures in cultural products (Colebrook, 2004). For instance, a movie, as a cultural product, may be influenced by certain underlying structures in the societies such as the state’s ideological background. Poststructuralists claim that history already builds the means and the conditions to study those underlying structures. Poststructuralists believe that understanding the power relations that produce a subject is essential if one wants to study that subject (Gerard, 1983). The subject here is defined as people who are subjected to certain forms of power, such as being subjected to an identity (e.g., mother, wife, laborer). Identities and other phenomena do not have essences that predate their social coordinates.  That is, no phenomenon ever has a fixed meaning or a meaning in-itself.  The identity or experience of a given phenomenon, according to these authors, is determined by the external, i.e. social structure. For example, whether someone is a mother or not, is determined by the social structure, there is no natural fact of the matter that determines it. 

The external structures that determine the identity or experience of a phenomenon change in time.  They are not stable.  For example, the state that forms a subject constantly changes.  This changes the individual, and the relations between the individual and the state. Despite the differences between the poststructuralist thinkers, all share an anti-foundationalist viewpoint as a rejection of essentialism. Inherently, post-structuralism does not in-itself advocate for an overthrow of institutions, but advocates for an understanding of its internal unstable aspects (Newman, 2007, p. 7). Thus for post-structuralists even the idea of human nature is a historical construct born out of fields of power. 

Deleuze and Guattari distinguish two types of representation: one being macro and the other being micro (Jun, 2011, p. 234). Macro representation refers to representative democracy or any form of state that justifies itself as a representation of the people. Deleuze believes that this limits individual potential of expression, in a sense that no individual can fully represent the people and their multiple desires (Patton, 2000). As for the micro level of representation, it takes an oppressive form since it contains practices that coercively tell people what to be, such as the assigned roles of a wife and the duties she has to perform. The state uses micro representations such as categorization and identity constructions as power mechanisms, and even desire itself, according to poststructuralists, is formed based on that power. In this way a constant psychological surveillance of bodies is made by distinguishing between abnormal and normal human desire (Rouselle, p. 51). For example, the fixed identity of a ‘wife’ or ‘husband’ in-itself distinguishes between a normal desire to be sexually exclusive with one person, and the abnormal desire to have multiple sexual partners. In parallel, the Foucaultian concept of discipline suggests that the collocation of these practices follow the exact structure of prison (Foucault, 1978, p. 184), where the subject’s desire is fully captured and limited by authority. 

Poststructuralism’s critique of fixed identity is especially amplified in Foucault’s (1978) analysis of sexuality. Foucault rejects what he calls the ‘repressive hypothesis’, the claim that modern states and societies silenced and prohibited sex. He instead argues that power does not necessarily repress sexuality but produces it as an object of regulation and classification. Medicine, religion, law, education and other discourses produce the categories through which people understand themselves as sexual objects. In this sense, certain classifications of sexuality can be seen as deviant, marital, healthy, or as reproductive. The main example that Foucault (1985) uses to support his argument is the ancient Greek discourse around sexuality. The main concern in ancient Greek moral discourse was not whether an individual was ‘heterosexual’ or ‘homosexual’ in the modern sense, but rather the Greeks addressed the ‘active’ or ‘passive 'position in the sexual relation (the dominant party and the submissive party), where the parties be of any sex. This showcases Foucault’s greater analysis, that sexuality can be interpreted differently through different social systems. 

Poststructuralist thinkers did not endorse anarchism, but their methodology and analysis of power, autonomy, and the state can be considered as a contribution to anarchism. Like anarchism, post structuralism is suspicious of fixed authority, representation, and universal claims that justify domination. This anti-authoratarian tendency in both theories can be seen in their rejection of centralized theories of power. For instance, post-structuralism already signifies the importance of labels (e.g., wife, husband) in shaping the individual in a specific power field beyond the immediate reach of the state. The state’s legitimacy depends on constructed truths about human nature and authority. Poststructuralism becomes useful in exposing those truths as contingent  and opens space for anarchist critique. 

## **Postanarchism’s Main Claims** 

As we saw above, anarchism faced great changes throughout history to adapt to the shift of political climate. Postanarchists particularly claim that power is no longer centralized in the state or the church, but is diffused in different informal institutions. Postanarchism is not necessarily a ‘new’ type of anarchism, for it is rather an expansion of classical anarchism. Saul Newman (2004) takes postanarchism to be a theory that adopts the egalitarian and emancipative aspects of classical anarchism, but acknowledges that radical political struggles today are over different issues, not just economic ones. Post-anarchism, even with the inspiration it draws from economic class struggles, focuses on areas such as gender, sexuality, bodily autonomy, language, and so on that were previously ignored. In this way, postanarchism amplifies resistance within the informal fields of power (e.g., sexuality, gender, or race). 

As noted above, post-anarchism questions the idea of human nature widely accepted within classical anarchism. Influenced by the Enlightenment thinkers, classical anarchism presupposes a stable, pre-social human essence (typically cooperative and non-hierarchical) that is distorted by the state and needs liberation to flourish. Anarchism, as we established before, traditionally relies on a conception of a human nature that exists prior to power relations. Saul Newman (2001) believes that modern power functions through essentialist identities, thus anarchists should avoid essentialist ideas in order to construct genuine forms of resistance (p. 4). For him, the transformations of recent times in political aspects are still tied to these essentialist ways of thinking, particularly with regard to national identity, and to forms of political sovereignty like the state. They did not at all challenge or disrupt these categories, often only further embedding them in political discourse and social reality. 

Postanarchist thinkers also borrow ideas from psychoanalytics to expand classical anarchism and respond to criticism. Some scholars claim that postanarchism is hyperfixated on abstract ontological ideas, and if all ethical theories are constructed inside fields of power, it cannot explain or justify resistance (Franks, 2007; Cohn and Wilbor, 2003). As a response to this question, of how postanarchism can provide a theory for resistance, Newman (2001) uses the complex psychoanalytical theory of Jacques Lacan. For Lacan, the subject is not a complete identity for it is rather produced through the symbolic order (e.g., system of languages, social rules, meanings); but the symbolic order is always divorced with the subject, where the subject does not fully understand the identity imposed on it (138–139). This gap is vital, for on one hand the subject is not outside of power in the classical anarchist view, but it is also not fully determined by power since there are always some parts of the subject that cannot be fully represented or explained by the imposed identity. Newman (2001) calls this a ‘lack’ or a ‘void’ that prevents the subject from having a stable essence; thus the emptiness keeps the subject’s supposed identity open (p. 147). Therefore, resistance to power stems from the failure of power to fully represent the subject, and to form a complete identity for the subject 

## **Postanarchist Critique of Normative Monogamy** 

The discussed postanarchist ideas can now be applied to monogamous marriage. In this section I will develop a postanarchist critique of monogamy relying on Newman’s postanarchism, Foucaultian  perception of sexuality as a historical construction, and Deleuzo-Guattarian conception of representation. Relying on the analysis above, I argue that postanarchists have to view monogamy as a tool used by the state to achieve certain goals such as population control. Even though major postanarchist thinkers such as Newman, May, or Call have not discussed monogamy directly, their conceptual apparatus could be useful in expanding the classical anarchist critique of marriage and family. Moreover, their writings suggest a particular direction this critique could take. The discussion of central theses of postanarchism suggest that they would accept the following about monogamy. 

 

(1) Monogamy, like any other phenomenon, is a historical construct and it serves as a norm because it was historically backed by power. For instance, postanarchists maintain that identities of wife and husband lack any non-social essence and are produced purely by the field of social power in which individuals socialize. This suggests that families in which husband and wife ‘materialize’ are also products of fields of power. This should not be interpreted as claiming either that monogamy is inherently liberatory or that it is oppressive, but rather that it can and is often used as a means of domination over people’s private lives by the state. (2) Monogamy is a form of obligation for people, and they are conditioned to desire it and see it as the natural form of intimacy. And lastly, (3) in addition to other forms of anarchists resistance, resistance against dominion should include challenging monogamy and multiplying forms of intimacy. However, postanarchists need not necessarily engage in abolishing monogamy.  Instead of simply abolishing monogamy, postanarchism would support opening space for different relational forms based on consent, mutuality, and non-domination. This opening of space will include both elaborating the critique outlined above (challenging the dominant cultural norms etc.) and suggesting policy revisions if and when these are feasible. 

As famously argued by Foucault, sexuality is not a fixed expression of human essence, or a private matter inside the individual, for it is as a product of discourse, institution, knowledge and power (Foucault, 1978). And this is not limited to just the centralized power of the state as the classical anarchist assumed, but also through informal institutions that have power over the subject’s body (e.g., family, friend group). As mentioned before, the mere existence of the term “cuckold” as an insult disciplines people through shame. Calling someone a “cuckold” suggests that a man has failed to control his partner’s sexuality. Thus, again, it is not only the state directly enforcing monogamy as a norm, but other informal institutions also support and promote it.  The state often supports these informal institutions by influencing the discourse around nonmonogamous practices. Power, in this case, does not only repress the sexuality of the individual, but also subjects them to a normalized sexual norm and identity. Monogamy is not only political because of the superiority of it in the face of law, but also through culture and language which exclusively showcases monogamy as natural. 

Similarly, the Deleuzo-Guattarian conception of microrepresentation can help us understand mononormative microrepresentation and its effects. Borrowing from Deleuze and Guattari, the subject is not naturally born as monogamous but is made to desire couplehood as a result of being subjected to the monogamous identity. Deleuze and Guattari believe that desire is not necessarily suppressed by the state but it is rather used by it (Newman, 2001). Monogamous desire is not necessarily a creation by the state, but is normalized because of the benefits the state gains from it. Applying Lacanian psychoanalysis to this discussion, mononormativity can be understood as symbolic identities that attempt to fix desire into a stable form, however, the subject cannot be fully captured by that order, for the identities that mononormativity offers cannot fully satisfy the subject. The postanarchist critique here is not necessarily a rejection of monogamy, but a questioning of monogamy as the essential element within human beings. In addition, monogamy is not inherently oppressive or liberatory, but it could be used as a tool of governance. The roles of ‘husband’, ‘boyfriend’, ‘girlfriend’ and other labels organize the desire of the subject into a recognizable social form, and the other desires that fall outside of these representative roles are seen as excessive, taboo, or simply face social backlash. The desire for multiplicity is internally reorganized through culture (e.g., movies, traditions, language), and the subject is gradually formed to experience exclusive couplehood as right or natural. 


Postanarchism, as an anarchist school of thought, assumes that all states are illegitimate and oppressive, therefore, it has to at least theoretically examine the norms and identities that states impose on subjects. The state’s authority can rest beyond the legal institutions and act on the individuals through the identities that are accepted as natural. A postanarchist point of view is that mononormativity generates a form of political obligation inside intimacy. Classical anarchists have long argued for the freedom of the individual to disobey the state, similarly, postanarchists move on to examine the relational norms. They claim that people do not have to feel an obligation to organize intimacy through the dominant model, or to understand marriage as a rightful claim of exclusivity over another person. People do not rationally consent to the authority of monogamy as a norm, for monogamy was presented to them as the normal standard condition of love, as something that was natural and could not ever be altered. The ‘choice’ for monogamy is shaped before the individual makes a conscious choice. The analyses above suggests that even in liberal forms of states, people are tacitly coerced to regulate themselves according to mononormative expectations. Even in countries where pre-marital casual sex (sexual activity between people who are not in a committed romantic relationship) is widespread, it is still seen as a phase of sexual experimentation where the ultimate goal is still a legitimate intimate relationship (Rothschild, 2018). This is not to claim that the choice for monogamy is a wrong one, or that the individual naturally desires non-monogamy, but that the widespread adherence to monogamy is politically conditioned. 

Postanarchism allows a critique of state recognition. Postanarchism does not stop at demanding the state to formally recognize excluded forms of intimacy. The reason for this is that this reassumes the organization of sexuality and intimate unions. Even if the state recognizes nonmonogamy along with monogamy, there still remains the question of whether intimacy has to stay interpreted through state endorsed categories. The deeper postanarchist concern here is that relationships do not have to stay classified or become a part of identity to be treated as meaningful. The postanarchist critique targets the dominance of normative monogamy and not monogamy as a conscious, voluntary choice. 

Postanarchism defends plurality of intimate lifestyles, while refusing to transform any relation into a universal model for people to follow. Relations have to be based on consent, autonomy, care, and non-domination. The multiplication of forms of intimacy is pushed by the desire to imagine love and sexuality without forcing them into the political grammar of ownership, recognition, and control. Postanarchism aims for a relation that allows networks of care, shifting intensities, and multiple commitments that are not organized around a central point of authority. For the postanarchist then, aspire for an accepting other’s autonomy by not requiring that intimacy that requires it to be to be absorbed into politically ratified identities.  As the identities of ‘husband’, ‘boyfriend’, ‘girlfriend’ and so on can neither fully represent any of the parties, nor fully satisfy their desires, the individual does not fit under these labels. This supports postanarchist arguments in favor of resistance towards these categories. This also supports the postanarchist position that love remains intimate even without the categories that attempt to stabilize it. Love does not serve any purpose other than itself. 


## **Conclusion** 

This philosophical paper examined normative monogamy from a postanarchist viewpoint. It was initiated with the claim that monogamy should be understood as a political phenomenon, and that it is established as the norm through legal and cultural methods. Normative monogamy or mononormativity is a system which treats couplehood with certain aspects of exclusivity as the most legitimate, mature, and stable form of intimate relationship. Even though anarchists have long examined monogamous marriage as an institution, they did not challenge  mononormativity. Applying postanarchist theory one can see that mononormativity has political and social authority through informal institutions over the intimate lives of people which give privilege to monogamy over other forms of intimacy. The purpose of this essay was not to condemn or dismantle monogamy, but to philosophically analyze it as a norm. 

The first part of the essay discussed monogamy, marriage, and the state. It showed that marriage is usually organized around sexual exclusivity, and despite the fact that societies view exclusivity differently, they still reinforce their conception of it. The reinforcement of exclusivity could be both cultural, such as through language, or formal through legal recognition by the state. The essay also examined the different arguments to justify monogamous marriage, such as arguments from human nature, social stability, child upbringing, paternal certainty, and the regulation of sexual behavior. These arguments rationalize monogamy and monogamous marriage as a norm and as a social/natural necessity. This paper concluded that these arguments are often political, since they connect intimacy to order, reproduction, inheritance, and social order. These arguments show that mononormativity benefits the state by easing the process of the state’s organization of legal identity, inheritance, taxation, immigration, and citizenship. This benefit goes both ways, monogamous relationships also benefit from the state. The state supports legally recognized couples through financial advantages, residence rights, spousal privilege, and decisionmaking rights. 

As monogamy is almost always the only state-backed form of intimate relations, nonmonogamous relations often remain socially invisible, illegal and illegitimate. In addition, sexuality and gender are heavily under the effect of mononormativity. Monogamous marriage historically had heavy ties with the patriarchy and the regulation of the sexual agency, and the reproductive capacity of women. This essay showcased that this link produces unequal expectations for men and women, such as sexual double standards, gendered domestic roles, and the surveillance of women’s sexuality. Thus, normative monogamy also informally influences the sexual subjectivity of individuals, where they might experience jealousy and possessiveness as natural features of love. 

The second part of the essay summarizes literature on the anarchist critique of the state, anarchist theories of authority and human nature. Anarchists believe the state does not have any moral rights to govern people and people do not have obligation to follow the state. Different anarchist traditions oppose the state for different reasons and imagine an anarchist society differently from one another. The main anarchist traditions include social anarchists and individualist anarchists; with their main disagreement being on the value of the individual and the collective. Anarchists of all stripes challenged coercive marriage, religious marriage, patriarchal marriage, and state-regulated marriage.  But classical anarchists did not question mononormativity as a broader social system that produces legitimate and illegitimate forms of intimacy. This is what this paper tries to address. 

Postanarchist theory revises and expands classical anarchism by applying poststructuralist critiques of fixed identity, representation, discourse and subject formation. It claims that power is not centralized within the state or formal institutions, for it can affect people through language, sexuality, family, social categories, etc. Postanarchism claims that human beings do not have a pre-political essence, and identities (e.g., citizenship, nationality) fail to fully represent people and this creates a resistance to fixed identities that states impose. As mononormativity affects through identities, language, and informal institutions and not only through legal systems, it is challenged by postanarchism. It does not suggest replacing monogamy with non-monogamy as a new norm, but it supports the multiplication of intimate possibilities. 

This research is arguably incomplete.  There is a need for a larger focus on existing literature from classical anarchists, poststructuralist thinkers, and postanarchist thinkers alike. 


Secondly, the conjecture made in the final section needs more textual support since Newman, May, and Call do not directly write about monogamy. Future research and more thorough reading of poststructuralist and postanarchists thinkers would enable them to carefully reconstruct how their concepts can be applied to intimacy without overstating their claims. This would make the postanarchist analysis stronger and more philosophically precise. Thirdly, some branches of anarchist theories such as queer anarchist and anarcha-feminist schools of thought have not been fully incorporated here. Careful examination of these theories may be helpful for understanding the social and political functions of mononormativity 



## **References** 

<mark>Bakunin, M. (1866).</mark> _<mark>Revolutionary catechism</mark>_ <mark>. Marxists Internet Archive.</mark> 

<u><mark>https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/bakunin/works/1866/catechism.htm</mark></u> <mark>Beckerman, S., & Valentine, P. (Eds.). (2002).</mark> _<mark>Cultures of multiple fathers: The theory and practice of partible paternity in lowland South America</mark>_ <mark>. University Press of Florida. Brake, E. (2009). Marriage and domestic partnership. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.),</mark> _<mark>The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.</mark>_ <mark>Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.</mark> <u><mark>https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/marriage/</mark></u> 

<mark>Carter, A. (1971). The political theory of anarchism. Routledge.</mark> 

<mark>Cherlin, A. J. (2004). The deinstitutionalization of American marriage.</mark> _<mark>Journal of</mark>_ 

_<mark>Marriage and Family, 66</mark>_ <mark>(4), 848–861. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0022-2445.2004.00058.x</mark> 


<mark>Christiano, T., & Sciaraffa, S. (2025). Authority. In E. N. Zalta & U. Nodelman (Eds.),</mark> _<mark>The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy</mark>_ <mark>(Winter 2025 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2025/entries/authority/ Colebrook, C. (2002).</mark> _<mark>Gilles Deleuze</mark>_ <mark>. Routledge.</mark> 

<mark>Conley, T. D., Moors, A. C., Matsick, J. L., & Ziegler, A. (2013). The fewer the merrier? Assessing stigma surrounding consensually non-monogamous romantic relationships.</mark> 

<mark>-</mark> _<mark>Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy, 13</mark>_ <mark>(1), 1–30. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530</mark> <u><mark>2415.2012.01286.x</mark></u> 

<mark>Cornell Law School. (n.d.).</mark> _<mark>Marital privilege</mark>_ <mark>. Legal Information Institute.</mark> 

<u><mark>https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/marital_privilege</mark></u> 

<mark>Crawford, M., & Popp, D. (2003). Sexual double standards: A review and</mark> 

<mark>methodological critique of two decades of research.</mark> _<mark>Journal of Sex Research, 40</mark>_ <mark>(1), 13– 26. https://doi.org/10.1080/00224490309552163</mark> 

<mark>Federal Ministry of Finance. (2024). An ABC of taxes.</mark> 

<u><mark>https://www.bundesfinanzministerium.de/Content/EN/Standardartikel/Press_Room/ Publications/Brochures/abc-of-taxes.pdf</mark></u> 

<mark>Fiala, A. (2017). Anarchism. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.),</mark> _<mark>The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 ed.).</mark>_ <mark>Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.</mark> 

<u><mark>https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/anarchism/</mark></u> 

<mark>Fineman, M. A. (2004).</mark> _<mark>The autonomy myth: A theory of dependency.</mark>_ <mark>The New Press. Foucault, M. (1978).</mark> _<mark>The history of sexuality, volume 1: An introduction</mark>_ <mark>(R. Hurley, Trans.). Pantheon Books.</mark> 


<mark>Foucault, M. (1985).</mark> _<mark>The use of pleasure: The history of sexuality, volume 2</mark>_ <mark>(R. Hurley, Trans.). Pantheon Books.</mark> 

<mark>Franks, B. (2020).</mark> _<mark>Anarchisms, postanarchisms and ethics.</mark>_ <mark>Rowman & Littlefield.</mark> 

<mark>Freud, S. (1959). “Civilized” sexual morality and modern nervous illness. In J. Strachey</mark> 

<mark>(Ed. & Trans.), The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 9, pp. 177–204). Hogarth Press. Original work published 1908.</mark> 

<mark>Freud, S. (1961). Civilization and its discontents (J. Strachey, Trans.). W. W. Norton. Original work published 1930.</mark> 

<mark>George, R. P. (2000). “Same-sex marriage” and “moral neutrality.” In C. Wolfe (Ed.),</mark> _<mark>Homosexuality and American public life</mark>_ <mark>(pp. 141–153). Spence Publishing Company. Goldman, E. (1914).</mark> _<mark>Marriage and love.</mark>_ <mark>Marxists Internet Archive.</mark> 

<u><mark>https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/goldman/works/1914/marriage-love.htm</mark></u> 

<mark>Gordon, U. (2008). A</mark> _<mark>narchy alive!: Anti-authoritarian politics from practice to theory.</mark>_ <mark>Pluto Press.</mark> 

<mark>Guérin, D. (1970).</mark> _<mark>Anarchism: From theory to practice.</mark>_ <mark>Monthly Review Press. Hamamra, B. T. (2018). The containment of female linguistic, spatial, and sexual</mark> 

<mark>transgression in Arden of Faversham: A contemporary Palestinian reading.</mark> _<mark>Comparative Literature: East & West, 2(</mark>_ <mark>2), 88–100. https://doi.org/10.1080/25723618.2018.1546474 Hennigh, L. (1970). Functions and limitations of Alaskan Eskimo wife trading.</mark> _<mark>Arctic,</mark> 2_ _<mark>3</mark>_ <mark>(1), 24–34. https://doi.org/10.14430/arctic3151</mark> 

<mark>Henrich, J., Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (2012). The puzzle of monogamous marriage.</mark> _<mark>Philosophy & Public Affairs, 40</mark>_ <mark>(1), 1–46.</mark> 


<mark>Heywood, A. (2021).</mark> _<mark>Political ideologies: An introduction</mark>_ <mark>(7th ed.). Bloomsbury Publishing.</mark> 

<mark>Jeppesen, S., & Nazar, H. (2012). Genders and sexualities in anarchist movements. In R. Kinna (Ed.),</mark> _<mark>The Continuum companion to anarchism</mark>_ <mark>(pp. 162–191). Continuum International Publishing Group.</mark> 

<mark>Johnson, K. R., & Holmes, B. M. (2009). Contradictory messages: A content analysis of Hollywood-produced romantic comedy feature films.</mark> _<mark>Communication Quarterly, 57</mark>_ <mark>(3), 352–373. https://doi.org/10.1080/01463370903113632</mark> 

<mark>Kinna, R. (2016).</mark> _<mark>Kropotkin: Reviewing the classical anarchist tradition</mark>_ <mark>. Edinburgh University Press.</mark> 

<mark>Kinna, R. (2019).</mark> _<mark>The government of no one: The theory and practice of anarchism.</mark>_ <mark>Penguin.</mark> 

<mark>Kramer, K. L., & Russell, A. F. (2014). Kin-selected cooperation without lifetime monogamy: Human insights and animal implications.</mark> _<mark>Trends in Ecology & Evolution,</mark> 2_ _<mark>9</mark>_ <mark>(11), 600–606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2014.09.001</mark> 

<mark>Kropotkin, P. (1902).</mark> _<mark>Mutual aid: A factor of evolution</mark>_ <mark>. McClure, Phillips & Co.</mark> 

<mark>Kulcsár, D. (2023). Revisiting Bakunin: Reflecting about the pandemic.</mark> _<mark>Filozofia</mark>_ <mark>, 78(9), 719–731. https://doi.org/10.31577/filozofia.2023.78.9.3</mark> 

<mark>Lerner, G. (1986).</mark> _<mark>The creation of patriarchy</mark>_ <mark>. Oxford University Press.</mark> 

<mark>Levy, C. (2010). Social histories of anarchism.</mark> _<mark>Journal for the Study of Radicalism, 4</mark>_ <mark>(2), 1–44. https://doi.org/10.1353/jsr.2010.0003</mark> 


<mark>Macedo, S., & de Marneffe, P. (2022). Monogamy: Government policy. In B. D. Earp, C. Chambers, & L. Watson (Eds.),</mark> _<mark>The Routledge handbook of philosophy of sex and sexuality</mark>_ <mark>(pp. 299–314). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003286523-26</mark> 

<mark>Marshall, P. (2008).</mark> _<mark>Demanding the impossible: A history of anarchism</mark>_ <mark>. Harper Perennial.</mark> 

<mark>May, T. (1994).</mark> _<mark>The political philosophy of poststructuralist anarchism</mark>_ <mark>. Pennsylvania State University Press.</mark> 

<mark>McLaughlin, P. (2007).</mark> _<mark>Anarchism and authority: A philosophical introduction to classical anarchism.</mark>_ <mark>Ashgate.</mark> 

<mark>Newman, S. (2001).</mark> _<mark>From Bakunin to Lacan: Anti-authoritarianism and the dislocation of power.</mark>_ <mark>Lexington Books.</mark> 

<mark>Newman, S. (2004, November–December). Interview with Saul Newman (S. Evren, K. Kiziltug, & E. Kosova, Interviewers).</mark> _<mark>Siyahi</mark>_ <mark>, 1, 4–11.</mark> 

<mark>Newman, S. (2007).</mark> _<mark>Unstable universalities: Poststructuralism and radical politics.</mark>_ <mark>Manchester University Press.</mark> 

<mark>Newman, S. (2011). Post-anarchism and radical politics today. In D. Rousselle & S. Evren (Eds.),</mark> _<mark>Post-anarchism: A reader</mark>_ <mark>(pp. 46–68). Pluto Press.</mark> 

<mark>Pateman, C. (1989).</mark> _<mark>The disorder of women:</mark>_ <mark>Democracy, feminism and political theory. Polity Press.</mark> 

<mark>Patton, P. (2000).</mark> _<mark>Deleuze and the political.</mark>_ <mark>Routledge.</mark> 

<mark>Schacht, R. N. (2013). Cassava and the Makushi: A shared history of resiliency and</mark> 

<mark>transformation. In H. Garth (Ed.),</mark> _<mark>Food and identity in the Caribbean</mark>_ <mark>(pp. 15–30). Bloomsbury Academic. https://doi.org/10.5040/9781350042162.ch-001</mark> 


<mark>Social Fund of Russia. (n.d.). Maternity (family) capital. https://sfr.gov.ru/en/matcap/</mark> 

<mark>Ward, C. (2004).</mark> _<mark>Anarchism: A very short introduction</mark>_ <mark>. Oxford University Press.</mark> 


